Add App-like PWA article (#2731)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/progressive-web-apps/app-like-pwas/index.md

---
layout: post
title: App-like Progressive Web Apps
subhead: Make your Progressive Web App not feel like a website, but like a "real" app
authors:
  - thomassteiner
description: |
  Learn how to make your Progressive Web App feel like a "real" app by understanding
  how to implement native app patterns with web technologies.

> hero: hero.jpg

Author: It's purely decorative. If pages on this path don't have a hero anyway, let me kill it :-) 

```suggestion
```

</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  The Podcasts app follows the so-called app shell model. All the static content that is needed to show the core app is cached locally,
  including decorative images like the left-hand menu icons and the core player UI icons.
  Dynamic content like the "Top Charts" data is only loaded on demand, with locally cached fallback content available should the loading fail.
  Read the  article <a href="https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/architecture/app-shell">The App Shell Model</a>
  to learn how to apply this architectural model to your web app.
{% endDetails %}

## Offline content available and media playable

While offline, via the left-hand drawer, I can still navigate to the "Downloaded" section and enjoy downloaded podcast episodes that are ready to be played
and are displayed with all metadata like artwork and descriptions.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./image16.png" alt="Podcasts app with a downloaded episode of a podcast playing." width="600">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Downloaded podcast episodes can be played even without network.</figcaption>

> </figure>

Author: Good point. Uploaded a new version.

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Sharing a podcast episode to the Messages app.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  The <a href="https://web.dev/web-share/">Web Share API</a> and the <a href="https://web.dev/web-share-target/">Web Share Target API</a>
  allow your app to share and receive texts, files, and links to and from other applications on the device.
  With the <a href="https://web.dev/image-support-for-async-clipboard/">Async Clipboard API</a>, you can programmatically read and write
  text and image data (PNG images) to the system clipboard.
  On Android, you can use the <a href="https://web.dev/contact-picker/">Contact Picker API</a> to select entries from the device's contacts manager.
  If you offer both a native app and a PWA, you can use the <a href="https://web.dev/get-installed-related-apps/">Get Installed Related Apps API</a>
  to check if the native app is installed, in which case you do not need to encourage the user to install the PWA or accept web push notifications.

> {% endDetails %}

Author: The app can provide its own context-menu. See excalidraw.com for an example. I acknowledge, though, that this isn't the native one.

  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  Syncing app state data is a task that you can delegate to the <a href="https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2015/12/background-sync">Background Sync API</a>. The sync operation itself does not have to happen immediately, just <em>eventually</em>, and maybe even when the user has closed the app again already.
{% endDetails %}

## Hardware media key controls

When I am busy with another application, say, reading a news page in the Chrome browser, I can still control the Podcasts app with the media keys on my laptop.
There is no need to switch to the app just to skip forward or backward.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./image9.png" alt="Apple MacBook Pro Magic Keyboard with annotated media keys." width="600">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">The media keys allow for controlling the Podcasts app (<a href="https://support.apple.com/guide/macbook-pro/magic-keyboard-apdd0116a6a2/mac">Source</a>).</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  Media keys are supported by the <a href="https://web.dev/media-session/">Media Session API</a>.

>   Like that, users can profit from the hardware media keys on their physical keyboards, headphones, or even control the web app

Author: LOL, I had to look up ESL readers and wasn't aware of any meme. Anyway, I have rephrased slightly now. 

```suggestion
  Like that, users can make use of the hardware media keys on their physical keyboards, headphones, or even control the web app
```

</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  The <a href="https://web.dev/native-file-system/">Native File System API</a> enables developers to get access to the local file system
  of the device. You can use it directly or via the <a href="https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/browser-nativefs">browser-nativefs</a>
  support library that transparently provides a fallback for browsers that do not support the API.
  For security reasons, system directories are not web-accessible.
{% endDetails %}

## Native look and feel

A more subtle thing but that is self-evident for a native application like Podcasts: none of the text labels are selectable and all texts blend in with the system font of the machine. Also my choice of system color theme (dark mode) is respected.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./image2.png" alt="The Podcasts app in dark mode." width="350">
  <img src="./image7.png" alt="The Podcasts app in light mode." width="350">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Podcasts supports Dark Mode and uses the default system font.</figcaption>

> </figure>

Author: Added the classes. Leaving the comment open regarding the question of the side-by-side screenshots.

> </figure>

Author: Actually, no, the classes made the screenshots look weirdly positioned.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./image8.png" alt="The Safari browser's integrated tile bar and toolbar.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption"></figcaption>
</figure>

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./image1.png" alt="The Podcasts app's customized split customized title bar.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Customized title bars of Safari and Podcasts.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  While not currently possible, <a href="https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/blob/master/TitleBarCustomization/explainer.md">title bar customization</a> is being worked on at the moment.
  You can (and should), however, specify the <a href="https://web.dev/add-manifest/#display"><code>display</code></a> and the
  <a href="https://web.dev/add-manifest/#theme-color"><code>theme-color</code></a> properties of the Web App Manifest to
  determine the look and feel of your application window and to decide which default browser controls—potentially none of them—should be shown.

> {% endDetails %}

Author: It's not as easy as upvoting a bug for all vendors. I suggest we hold off from adding a specific CtA here, and, once https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/issues/2127 has landed, point to it.

## Snappy animations

> In-app animations are snappy and smooth in Podcasts. For example, when I open the "Episode Notes" drawer on the right, it elegantly slides in. When I remove one episode from my downloads, the remaining episodes float up and consume the screen real estate that was freed by the deleted episode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In-app animations are snappy and smooth in Podcasts. For example, when I open the **Episode Notes** drawer on the right, it elegantly slides in. When I remove one episode from my downloads, the remaining episodes float up and consume the screen real estate that was freed by the deleted episode.
```

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./image14.png" alt="The Podcasts app with the 'Episode Notes' drawer expanded." width="600">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image14.png" class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" alt="The Podcasts app with the 'Episode Notes' drawer expanded.">
```

</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  Performant animations on the web are certainly possible if you take into account a number of best practices
  outlined in the article <a href="https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/design-and-ux/animations/animations-and-performance">Animations and Performance</a>.
  Scroll animations as commonly seen in paginated content or media carousels can be massively improved by using the <a href="https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2018/07/css-scroll-snap">CSS Scroll Snap</a> feature.
  For full control, you can use the <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Animations_API">Web Animations API</a>.
{% endDetails %}

## Content surfaced outside of app

The Podcasts app on iOS can surface content in other locations than the actual application, for example, in the system's Widgets view, or in the form of a Siri Suggestion. Having proactive, usage-based calls-to-action that just require a tap to interact with can greatly increase the re-engagement rate of an app like Podcasts.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./image6.png" alt="iOS Widget view showing the Podcasts app suggesting a new episode of a podcast." width="300">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image6.png" class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" alt="iOS Widget view showing the Podcasts app suggesting a new episode of a podcast." width="300">
```

Reviewer: This image is quite busy. I suggest setting a plain black background and removing the **TIPS** and **STOCKS** notifications.

Author: I want it to be realistic, so not just one widget. I have added a red highlight box now.

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">App content is surfaced outside of the main Podcasts app.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  The <a href="https://web.dev/content-indexing-api/">Content Index API</a> allows your application
  to tell the browser which content of the PWA is available offline.
  This allows the browser to surface this content outside of the main app.
  By marking up interesting content in your app as suitable for <a href="https://developers.google.com/search/docs/data-types/speakable">speakable</a>
  audio playback and by using <a href="https://developers.google.com/search/docs/guides/search-gallery">structured markup</a> in general,
  you can help search engines and virtual assistants like the Google Assistant present your offerings in an ideal light.

> {% endDetails %}

Reviewer: Can I get my PWA notification to show up on my iOS device? This seems misleading to me.

Author: Conditions apply, yes. Let me find a way to address the browser compatibility questions.

## Lock screen media control widget

When a podcast episode is playing, the Podcasts app shows a beautiful control widget on the lock screen that features metadata like the episode artwork, the episode title, and the podcast name.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./image17.png" alt="iOS media playback widget on the lock screen showing a podcast episode with rich metadata." width="300">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image17.png" class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" alt="iOS media playback widget on the lock screen showing a podcast episode with rich metadata." width="300">
```

Author: This uses a device frame now, no screenshot class needed.

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Media playing in the app can be controlled from the lock screen.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  The <a href="https://web.dev/media-session/">Media Session API</a> lets you specify metadata like artwork, track titles, etc.
  that then gets displayed on the lock screen, smartwatches, or other media widgets in the browser.

> {% endDetails %}

Reviewer: This section also implies to me that this feature is available on iOS

Author: Same as before, browser compatibility is an open question.

## Push notifications

Push notifications have become a bit of an annoyance on the web
(albeit [notification prompts are a lot quieter](https://blog.chromium.org/2020/01/introducing-quieter-permission-ui-for.html) now),
but if used properly, they can add a lot of value.
For example, the iOS Podcasts app can optionally notify me of new episodes of podcasts I am subscribed to or recommend me new ones, as well as alert me of new app features.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./image12.png" alt="iOS Podcasts app in the 'Notifications' settings screen showing the 'New Episodes' notifications toggle activated." width="300">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image12.png" class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" alt="iOS Podcasts app in the 'Notifications' settings screen showing the 'New Episodes' notifications toggle activated." width="300">
```

Author: This uses a device frame, no screenshot class needed.

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Apps can send push notifications to inform the user about new content.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  The <a href="https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/push-notifications">Push API</a>
  allows your app to receive push notifications so you can notify your users about noteworthy events around your PWA.
  For notifications that should fire at a known time in the future and that do not require a network connection,
  you can use the <a href="https://web.dev/notification-triggers/">Notification Triggers API</a>.

> {% endDetails %}

Reviewer: This section also implies to me that this feature is available on iOS

Author: Same as before.

## App icon badging

Whenever there are new episodes available for one of the podcasts I am subscribed to, an app icon badge on the Podcasts home screen icon appears, again encouraging me to re-engage with the app in a way that is not intrusive.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./image13.png" alt="iOS settings screen showing the 'Badges' toggle activated." width="310">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image13.png" class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" alt="iOS settings screen showing the 'Badges' toggle activated." width="310">
```

Author: Device frame.

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Badges are a subtle way for applications to inform about new content.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  You can set app icon badges with the <a href="https://web.dev/badging-api/">Badging API</a>.
  This is especially useful when your PWA has some notion of "unread" items or when you need a means
  to unobtrusively draw the user's attention back to the app.

> {% endDetails %}

Reviewer: This section also implies to me that this feature is available on iOS

Author: Same as before.

> ## Media playback trumps energy saver settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Media playback takes precedence over energy saver settings
```
I know this is overly cautious and politically correct but we should avoid the word `trump` unless absolutely needed, in this case I don't think it is. Using the word is not worth the potential backlash. High risk, low benefit.

Author: LOL, yeah!

When podcast media is playing, the screen may turn off, but the system will not enter standby mode.
Apps can optionally keep the screen awake, too, for example to display lyrics or captions.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./image21.png" alt="macOS Preferences in the 'Energy Saver' section." width="400">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image21.png" class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" alt="macOS Preferences in the 'Energy Saver' section.">
```

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Apps can keep the screen awake.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  The <a href="https://web.dev/wakelock/">Screen Wake Lock API</a> allows you to prevent the screen from turning off.
  Media playback on the web automatically prevents the system from entering standby mode.
{% endDetails %}

## App discovery through an app store

While the Podcasts app is part of the macOS desktop experience, on iOS it needs to be installed from the App Store.

> A quick search for "podcast", "podcasts", or "apple podcasts" immediately turns the app up in the App Store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A quick search for `podcast`, `podcasts`, or `apple podcasts` immediately turns the app up in the App Store.
```

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./image22.png" alt="iOS App Store search for 'podcasts' reveals the Podcasts app." width="300">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image22.png" class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" alt="iOS App Store search for 'podcasts' reveals the Podcasts app." width="300">
```

Author: I now use device frames, so no screenshot class needed.

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Users have learned to discover apps in app stores.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  While Apple does not allow PWAs on the App Store, on Android, you can submit your PWA
  <a href="https://web.dev/using-a-pwa-in-your-android-app/">wrapped in a Trusted Web Activity</a>.
  The <a href="https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/bubblewrap"><code>bubblewrap</code></a> script makes this a painless operation.
  This script is also what internally powers <a href="https://www.pwabuilder.com/">PWABuilder</a>'s Android app export feature,
  which you can use without touching the command line.
{% endDetails %}

## Conclusion

PWAs have come a long way since their introduction in 2015.

> In the context of [Project Fugu 🐡](/fugu-status), we are working on closing the last remaining gaps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the context of [Project Fugu 🐡](/fugu-status), Chrome is working on closing the last remaining gaps.
```

By following even only some of the pieces of advice in this article,

> you can reach that holy grail app-like native feeling and make your users forget

Reviewer: The Holy Grail is a mythical thing that has never actually been found or achieved. I suggest rephrasing this because it currently implies PWAs will never actually achieve par with "native" apps.

Author: Good point. And while probably true (we'll never fully get there), it may not be the best way to phrase it.

  On Android, the browser in turn can even delegate these downloads further on to the operating system, so the browser does not need to be continuously running.
  Once the download has completed, your app's service worker gets woken up and you can decide what to do with the response.
{% endDetails %}

## Sharing to and interacting with other applications

The Podcasts app integrates naturally with other applications. For example, when I right-click an episode that I like, I can share it to other apps on my device, like the Messages app. It also naturally integrates with the system clipboard. I can right-click any episode and copy a link to it.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./image19.png" alt="The Podcasts app's context menu invoked on a podcast episode with the 'Share Episode > Messages' option selected." width="600">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Sharing a podcast episode to the Messages app.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  The <a href="https://web.dev/web-share/">Web Share API</a> and the <a href="https://web.dev/web-share-target/">Web Share Target API</a>

>   allow your app to share and receive texts, files, and links to and from other applications on the device.

Author: ```suggestion
  allow your app to share and receive texts, files, and links to and from other applications on the device.
  Although it is not yet possible for a web app to add menu items to the operating system's built-in right-click menu, there are lots of other ways to link to and from other apps on the device.
```

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--fullbleed">
  <img src="./image3.png" alt="The macOS task switcher with a number of app icons to choose from, one of them the Podcasts one." >
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption w-figcaption--fullbleed">Multitasking back to the Podcasts app.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  Progressive Web Apps on both desktop and mobile can be installed to the home screen, start menu, or application dock.
  Installation can happen based on a proactive prompt, or fully controlled by the app developer.
  The article <a href="https://web.dev/install-criteria/">What does it take to be installable?</a> covers everything you need to know.
  When multitasking, PWAs appear independent from the browser.
{% endDetails %}

## Quick actions in context menu

The most common app actions, **Search** for new content and **Check for New Episodes**, are available right from the context menu of the app in the Dock. Via the **Options** menu, I can also decide to open the app at login time.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./image18.png" alt="Podcasts app icon context menu showing the 'Search' and 'Check for New Episodes' options." width="267">

Author: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image18.png" alt="Podcasts app icon context menu showing the 'Search' and 'Check for New Episodes' options." class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" width="267">
```

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Quick actions are immediately available right from the app icon.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  By specifying <a href="https://web.dev/app-shortcuts/">app icon shortcuts</a>
  in the PWA's web app manifest, you can register quick routes to common tasks that users can reach directly from the app icon.
  On operating systems like macOS, users can also right-click the app icon and set the app to launch at login time.
  There is ongoing work on a proposal for <a href="https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/tree/master/RunOnLogin">run on login</a>.
{% endDetails %}

## Act as default app

Other native applications and even websites or emails can integrate with the Podcasts app by leveraging the `podcasts://` URL scheme. If I follow a link like [`podcasts://podcasts.apple.com/podcast/the-css-podcast/id1042283903`](podcasts://podcasts.apple.com/podcast/the-css-podcast/id1042283903) while in the browser, I am brought right into the Podcasts app and can decide to subscribe or listen to the podcast.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./image20.png" class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" alt="The Chrome browser showing a confirmation dialog asking the user whether they want to open the Podcasts app.">

Author: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image20.png" alt="The Chrome browser showing a confirmation dialog asking the user whether they want to open the Podcasts app.">
```

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">The Podcasts app can be opened right from the browser.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  Handling fully custom URL schemes is not yet possible, but there is ongoing work on a proposal for
  <a href="https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/blob/master/URLProtocolHandler/explainer.md">URL Protocol Handling</a>
  for PWAs. Currently, <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Navigator/registerProtocolHandler"><code>registerProtocolHandler()</code></a> with a <code>web+</code> scheme prefix is the second best alternative.
{% endDetails %}

## Native file system integration

You may not immediately think of it, but the Podcasts app naturally integrates with the native file system. When I download a podcast episode, on my laptop it is stored in `~/Library/Group Containers/243LU875E5.groups.com.apple.podcasts/Library/Cache`. Unlike, say `~/Documents`, this directory is of course not meant to be accessed directly by regular users, but it is there.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./image5.png" class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" alt="The macOS Finder navigated to the Podcasts app's system directory.">

Author: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image5.png" alt="The macOS Finder navigated to the Podcasts app's system directory.">
```

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Podcast episodes are stored in a special system app folder.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  The <a href="https://web.dev/native-file-system/">Native File System API</a> enables developers to get access to the local file system
  of the device. You can use it directly or via the <a href="https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/browser-nativefs">browser-nativefs</a>
  support library that transparently provides a fallback for browsers that do not support the API.
  For security reasons, system directories are not web-accessible.
{% endDetails %}

## Native look and feel

A more subtle thing but that is self-evident for a native application like Podcasts: none of the text labels are selectable and all texts blend in with the system font of the machine. Also my choice of system color theme (dark mode) is respected.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./image2.png" alt="The Podcasts app in dark mode." width="350">
>   <img src="./image7.png" alt="The Podcasts app in light mode." width="350">

Author: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image2.png" alt="The Podcasts app in dark mode." class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" width="350">
  <img src="./image7.png" alt="The Podcasts app in light mode." class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" width="350">
```

> <figure class="w-figure">
>   <img src="./image2.png" alt="The Podcasts app in dark mode." width="350">
>   <img src="./image7.png" alt="The Podcasts app in light mode." width="350">
>   <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Podcasts supports Dark Mode and uses the default system font.</figcaption>
> </figure>

Author: ```suggestion
<div class="w-columns">
<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./image2.png" alt="The Podcasts app in dark mode." width="350">
  <img src="./image7.png" alt="The Podcasts app in light mode." width="350">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Podcasts supports Dark Mode and uses the default system font.</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>
```

Found it in https://web.dev/handbook/web-dev-components/#columns.

>   <img src="./image2.png" alt="The Podcasts app in dark mode." class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" width="350">
>   <img src="./image7.png" alt="The Podcasts app in light mode." class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" width="350">

Author: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image2.png" alt="The Podcasts app in dark mode." width="350">
  <img src="./image7.png" alt="The Podcasts app in light mode." width="350">
```

  Be sure, though, to not abuse this property for making <em>app contents</em> unselectable,
  it should only be used for UI elements like button texts, etc.
  The <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-family#<generic-name>:~:text=system%2Dui,-Glyphs"><code>system-ui</code></a>
  value for the <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-family"><code>font-family</code></a> CSS property allows you to
  specify the default UI font of the system to be used for your app, whatever it may be in the concrete case.
  Finally, your app can obey to the user's color scheme preference by respecting their <a href="https://web.dev/prefers-color-scheme/"><code>prefers-color-scheme</code></a> choice, with an optional <a href="https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/dark-mode-toggle">dark mode toggle</a>
  to override it.
{% endDetails %}

## Customized title bar

When you look at the Podcasts app window, you notice that it does not have a classic integrated title bar and toolbar, like, for example, the Safari browser window, but a customized experience that looks like a sidebar docked to the main player window.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./image8.png" alt="The Safari browser's integrated tile bar and toolbar.">

Author: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image8.png" class="w-screenshot" alt="The Safari browser's integrated tile bar and toolbar.">
```

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Customized title bars of Safari and Podcasts.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  While not currently possible, <a href="https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/blob/master/TitleBarCustomization/explainer.md">title bar customization</a> is being worked on at the moment.
  You can (and should), however, specify the <a href="https://web.dev/add-manifest/#display"><code>display</code></a> and the
  <a href="https://web.dev/add-manifest/#theme-color"><code>theme-color</code></a> properties of the web app manifest to
  determine the look and feel of your application window and to decide which default browser controls—potentially none of them—should be shown.
{% endDetails %}

## Snappy animations

In-app animations are snappy and smooth in Podcasts. For example, when I open the **Episode Notes** drawer on the right, it elegantly slides in. When I remove one episode from my downloads, the remaining episodes float up and consume the screen real estate that was freed by the deleted episode.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./image14.png" class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" alt="The Podcasts app with the 'Episode Notes' drawer expanded.">

Author: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image14.png" alt="The Podcasts app with the 'Episode Notes' drawer expanded.">
```

{% endDetails %}

## App icon badging

Whenever there are new episodes available for one of the podcasts I am subscribed to, an app icon badge on the Podcasts home screen icon appears, again encouraging me to re-engage with the app in a way that is not intrusive.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./image13.png" alt="iOS settings screen showing the 'Badges' toggle activated." width="310">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Badges are a subtle way for applications to inform about new content.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  You can set app icon badges with the <a href="https://web.dev/badging-api/">Badging API</a>.
  This is especially useful when your PWA has some notion of "unread" items or when you need a means
  to unobtrusively draw the user's attention back to the app.
{% endDetails %}

## Media playback takes precedence over energy saver settings

When podcast media is playing, the screen may turn off, but the system will not enter standby mode.
Apps can optionally keep the screen awake, too, for example to display lyrics or captions.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./image21.png" class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" alt="macOS Preferences in the 'Energy Saver' section.">

Author: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image21.png" alt="macOS Preferences in the 'Energy Saver' section.">
```

        <td>
          <ul>
            <li><a href="https://web.dev/badging-api/">Badging API</a></li>
          </ul>
        </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>Media playback trumps energy saver settings</td>
        <td>
          <ul>
            <li><a href="https://web.dev/wakelock/">Screen Wake Lock API</a></li>
          </ul>
        </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>App discovery through an app store</td>
        <td>
          <ul>
            <li>
              <a href="https://web.dev/using-a-pwa-in-your-android-app/">Trusted Web Activity</a>
            </li>
            <li>
              <a href="https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/bubblewrap"
                ><code>bubblewrap</code> library</a
              >
            </li>
            <li><a href="https://www.pwabuilder.com/">PWABuilder tool</a></li>
          </ul>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</div>

## Conclusion

PWAs have come a long way since their introduction in 2015.
In the context of [Project Fugu 🐡](/fugu-status), Chrome is working on closing the last remaining gaps.
By following even only some of the pieces of advice in this article,

> you can reach that holy grail app-like native feeling and make your users forget

Author: ```suggestion
you can piece by piece get closer to that app-like native feeling and make your users forget
```

In order to answer this question, let me use the native Apple [Podcasts](https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT201859) app as an example.
It is available on macOS on desktop and on iOS (and iPadOS respectively) on mobile.
While Podcasts is a media application, the core ideas I illustrate with its help apply to other categories of apps, too.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./image0.png" alt="An iPhone and a MacBook side by side, both running the Podcasts application." class="w-screenshot" width="600">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Apple Podcasts on iPhone and on macOS (<a href="https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT201859">Source</a>).</figcaption>
</figure>

> 

Author: ```suggestion

{% Aside 'caution' %}
Each native app feature that is listed below has a **How to do this on the web**
component that you can open for more details.
Please note that not all browsers on the various operating systems support all the APIs
that are listed. Be sure to carefully review the compatibility notes in the linked articles.
{% endAside %}
```

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">After subscribing to a podcast, the latest episode is immediately downloaded.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  Downloading a podcast episode is an operation that potentially can take longer. The <a href="https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2018/12/background-fetch">Background Fetch API</a> lets you delegate downloads to the browser, which takes care of them in the background.
  On Android, the browser in turn can even delegate these downloads further on to the operating system, so the browser does not need to be continuously running.
  Once the download has completed, your app's service worker gets woken up and you can decide what to do with the response.
{% endDetails %}

## Sharing to and interacting with other applications

The Podcasts app integrates naturally with other applications. For example, when I right-click an episode that I like, I can share it to other apps on my device, like the Messages app. It also naturally integrates with the system clipboard. I can right-click any episode and copy a link to it.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./image19.png" alt="The Podcasts app's context menu invoked on a podcast episode with the 'Share Episode > Messages' option selected." width="600">

Author: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image19.png" class="w-screenshot" alt="The Podcasts app's context menu invoked on a podcast episode with the 'Share Episode > Messages' option selected." width="600">
```

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--fullbleed">
  <img class="w-screenshot" src="./image3.png" alt="The macOS task switcher with a number of app icons to choose from, one of them the Podcasts one." >
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption w-figcaption--fullbleed">Multitasking back to the Podcasts app.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  Progressive Web Apps on both desktop and mobile can be installed to the home screen, start menu, or application dock.
  Installation can happen based on a proactive prompt, or fully controlled by the app developer.
  The article <a href="https://web.dev/install-criteria/">What does it take to be installable?</a> covers everything you need to know.
  When multitasking, PWAs appear independent from the browser.
{% endDetails %}

## Quick actions in context menu

The most common app actions, **Search** for new content and **Check for New Episodes**, are available right from the context menu of the app in the Dock. Via the **Options** menu, I can also decide to open the app at login time.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./image18.png" alt="Podcasts app icon context menu showing the 'Search' and 'Check for New Episodes' options." class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled" width="267">

Author: ```suggestion
  <img src="./image18.png" alt="Podcasts app icon context menu showing the 'Search' and 'Check for New Episodes' options." class="w-screenshot" width="267">
```

          </ul>
        </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>App discovery through an app store</td>
        <td>
          <ul>
            <li>
              <a href="https://web.dev/using-a-pwa-in-your-android-app/">Trusted Web Activity</a>
            </li>
            <li>
              <a href="https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/bubblewrap"
                ><code>bubblewrap</code> library</a
              >
            </li>
            <li><a href="https://www.pwabuilder.com/">PWABuilder tool</a></li>
          </ul>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</div>

## Conclusion

PWAs have come a long way since their introduction in 2015.
In the context of [Project Fugu 🐡](/fugu-status), Chrome is working on closing the last remaining gaps.
By following even only some of the pieces of advice in this article,
you can piece by piece get closer to that app-like native feeling and make your users forget
that they are dealing with "just a website", because, honestly, most of them do not care
how your app is built (and why should they?), as long as it feels like a *real* app.

## Acknowledgements

> 

Author: ```suggestion

This article was reviewed by Kayce Basques, Joe Medley, Joshua Bell, Dion Almaer, Ade Oshineye,
Pete LePage, and Jeffrey Yasskin.
```

> Hero image by [Leio McLaren](https://unsplash.com/@leio) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/photos/R6IWobiTW1k).

Author: ```suggestion
```

In order to answer this question, let me use the native Apple [Podcasts](https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT201859) app as an example.
It is available on macOS on desktop and on iOS (and iPadOS respectively) on mobile.
While Podcasts is a media application, the core ideas I illustrate with its help apply to other categories of apps, too.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./image0.png" alt="An iPhone and a MacBook side by side, both running the Podcasts application." class="w-screenshot" width="600">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Apple Podcasts on iPhone and on macOS (<a href="https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT201859">Source</a>).</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Aside 'caution' %}
Each native app feature that is listed below has a **How to do this on the web**
component that you can open for more details.
Please note that not all browsers on the various operating systems support all the listed APIs
or functionalities. Be sure to carefully review the compatibility notes in the linked articles.

> {% endAside %}

Author: ```suggestion
{% endAside %}

```

{% endDetailsSummary %}
  By leveraging the <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/user-select"><code>user-select</code></a>
  CSS property with the value of <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/user-select#Syntax:~:text=none,-The"><code>none</code></a>,
  you can protect UI elements from being accidentally selected.
  Be sure, though, to not abuse this property for making <em>app contents</em> unselectable,
  it should only be used for UI elements like button texts, etc.
  The <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-family#<generic-name>:~:text=system%2Dui,-Glyphs"><code>system-ui</code></a>
  value for the <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-family"><code>font-family</code></a> CSS property allows you to
  specify the default UI font of the system to be used for your app, whatever it may be in the concrete case.
  Finally, your app can obey to the user's color scheme preference by respecting their <a href="https://web.dev/prefers-color-scheme/"><code>prefers-color-scheme</code></a> choice, with an optional <a href="https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/dark-mode-toggle">dark mode toggle</a>

>   to override it.

Author: ```suggestion
  to override it.
  Another thing to decide on might be what the browser should do when reaching the boundary of a scrolling area.
 This is possible with the <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overscroll-behavior"><code>overscroll-behavior</code></a> CSS property.
```

            <li><a href="https://web.dev/notification-triggers/">Notification Triggers API</a></li>
          </ul>
        </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>App icon badging</td>
        <td>
          <ul>
            <li><a href="https://web.dev/badging-api/">Badging API</a></li>
          </ul>
        </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>Media playback trumps energy saver settings</td>
        <td>
          <ul>
            <li><a href="https://web.dev/wakelock/">Screen Wake Lock API</a></li>
          </ul>
        </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>App discovery through an app store</td>
        <td>
          <ul>
            <li>
              <a href="https://web.dev/using-a-pwa-in-your-android-app/">Trusted Web Activity</a>
            </li>
            <li>
              <a href="https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/bubblewrap"
                ><code>bubblewrap</code> library</a
              >
            </li>
            <li><a href="https://www.pwabuilder.com/">PWABuilder tool</a></li>
          </ul>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</div>

## Conclusion

PWAs have come a long way since their introduction in 2015.

> In the context of [Project Fugu 🐡](/fugu-status), Chrome is working on closing the last remaining gaps.

Author: ```suggestion
In the context of [Project Fugu 🐡](/fugu-status), the cross-company Chromium team is working on closing the last remaining gaps.
```

By following even only some of the pieces of advice in this article,
you can piece by piece get closer to that app-like native feeling and make your users forget
that they are dealing with "just a website", because, honestly, most of them do not care
how your app is built (and why should they?), as long as it feels like a *real* app.

## Acknowledgements

This article was reviewed by Kayce Basques, Joe Medley, Joshua Bell, Dion Almaer, Ade Oshineye,

> Pete LePage, and Jeffrey Yasskin.

Author: ```suggestion
Pete LePage, Sam Thorogood, and Jeffrey Yasskin.
```

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./image20.png" alt="The Chrome browser showing a confirmation dialog asking the user whether they want to open the Podcasts app.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">The Podcasts app can be opened right from the browser.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  Handling fully custom URL schemes is not yet possible, but there is ongoing work on a proposal for
  <a href="https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/blob/master/URLProtocolHandler/explainer.md">URL Protocol Handling</a>
  for PWAs. Currently, <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Navigator/registerProtocolHandler"><code>registerProtocolHandler()</code></a> with a <code>web+</code> scheme prefix is the second best alternative.
{% endDetails %}

## Native file system integration

> You may not immediately think of it, but the Podcasts app naturally integrates with the native file system. When I download a podcast episode, on my laptop it is stored in `~/Library/Group Containers/243LU875E5.groups.com.apple.podcasts/Library/Cache`. Unlike, say `~/Documents`, this directory is of course not meant to be accessed directly by regular users, but it is there.

Reviewer 2: For an app like Podcasts is there a benefit to using the Native Filesystem API over IndexedDB? ~/Library isn't designed to be user-visible and is not accessible with the Native Filesystem API.

Author: This is more to raise awareness that such an app uses the file system. The prose makes clear it's not meant to be user-visible. The section on [offline content available and media playable](https://deploy-preview-2731--web-dev-staging.netlify.app/app-like-pwas/#offline-content-available-and-media-playable) provides background on the different storage mechanisms and links to an article how to decide for one.

Reviewer 2: My concern is that the text in this section might lead developers down the wrong path if they don't notice the other one. Can you link to that section from this one?

Author: Added in https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/pull/2731/commits/5e22f4654bbe4a98fdd412fc7298fcba5f1e1ef2.

        <td>App discovery through an app store</td>
        <td>
          <ul>
            <li>
              <a href="https://web.dev/using-a-pwa-in-your-android-app/">Trusted Web Activity</a>
            </li>
            <li>
              <a href="https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/bubblewrap"
                ><code>bubblewrap</code> library</a
              >
            </li>
            <li><a href="https://www.pwabuilder.com/">PWABuilder tool</a></li>
          </ul>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</div>

## Conclusion

PWAs have come a long way since their introduction in 2015.
In the context of [Project Fugu 🐡](/fugu-status), the cross-company Chromium team is working on closing the last remaining gaps.
By following even only some of the pieces of advice in this article,
you can piece by piece get closer to that app-like native feeling and make your users forget
that they are dealing with "just a website", because, honestly, most of them do not care
how your app is built (and why should they?), as long as it feels like a *real* app.

## Acknowledgements

This article was reviewed by Kayce Basques, Joe Medley, Joshua Bell, Dion Almaer, Ade Oshineye,

> Pete LePage, Sam Thorogood, and Jeffrey Yasskin.

Author: ```suggestion
Pete LePage, Sam Thorogood, Reilly Grant, and Jeffrey Yasskin.
```

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./image20.png" alt="The Chrome browser showing a confirmation dialog asking the user whether they want to open the Podcasts app.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">The Podcasts app can be opened right from the browser.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  Handling fully custom URL schemes is not yet possible, but there is ongoing work on a proposal for
  <a href="https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/blob/master/URLProtocolHandler/explainer.md">URL Protocol Handling</a>
  for PWAs. Currently, <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Navigator/registerProtocolHandler"><code>registerProtocolHandler()</code></a> with a <code>web+</code> scheme prefix is the second best alternative.
{% endDetails %}

## Native file system integration

> You may not immediately think of it, but the Podcasts app naturally integrates with the native file system. When I download a podcast episode, on my laptop it is stored in `~/Library/Group Containers/243LU875E5.groups.com.apple.podcasts/Library/Cache`. Unlike, say `~/Documents`, this directory is of course not meant to be accessed directly by regular users, but it is there.

Author: ```suggestion
You may not immediately think of it, but the Podcasts app naturally integrates with the native file system. When I download a podcast episode, on my laptop it is stored in `~/Library/Group Containers/243LU875E5.groups.com.apple.podcasts/Library/Cache`. Unlike, say `~/Documents`, this directory is of course not meant to be accessed directly by regular users, but it is there.
Other storage mechanisms than files are referenced in the [offline content](#offline-content-available-and-media-playable) section.
```

---
layout: post

> title: App-like Progressive Web Apps

Author: ```suggestion
title: Make your PWA feel more like an app
```

> title: App-like Progressive Web Apps

Author: Done.

{% endDetails %}

## Hardware media key controls

When I am busy with another application, say, reading a news page in the Chrome browser, I can still control the Podcasts app with the media keys on my laptop.
There is no need to switch to the app just to skip forward or backward.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./image9.png" alt="Apple MacBook Pro Magic Keyboard with annotated media keys." width="600">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">The media keys allow for controlling the Podcasts app (<a href="https://support.apple.com/guide/macbook-pro/magic-keyboard-apdd0116a6a2/mac">Source</a>).</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  Media keys are supported by the <a href="https://web.dev/media-session/">Media Session API</a>.
  Like that, users can make use of the hardware media keys on their physical keyboards, headphones, or even control the web app
  from the software media keys on their smartwatches.
{% endDetails %}

## Multitasking and app shortcut

> Of course I can always multitask back to the Podcasts app from anywhere. The app has a clearly distinguishable icon that I can also put on my desktop or application dock so Podcasts can be launched immediately when I feel like it.

Author: In this case I mean Podcasts the app name.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./image5.png" alt="The macOS Finder navigated to the Podcasts app's system directory.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Podcast episodes are stored in a special system app folder.</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  The <a href="https://web.dev/native-file-system/">Native File System API</a> enables developers to get access to the local file system
  of the device. You can use it directly or via the <a href="https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/browser-nativefs">browser-nativefs</a>
  support library that transparently provides a fallback for browsers that do not support the API.
  For security reasons, system directories are not web-accessible.
{% endDetails %}

## Native look and feel

A more subtle thing but that is self-evident for a native application like Podcasts: none of the text labels are selectable and all texts blend in with the system font of the machine. Also my choice of system color theme (dark mode) is respected.

<div class="w-columns">
  <figure class="w-figure">
    <img src="./image2.png" alt="The Podcasts app in dark mode." width="350">

>     <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Podcasts supports light and dark mode.</figcaption>

Author: ```suggestion
    <figcaption class="w-figcaption">The Podcasts app supports light and dark mode.</figcaption>
```

  </figure>
  <figure class="w-figure">
    <img src="./image7.png" alt="The Podcasts app in light mode." width="350">
    <figcaption class="w-figcaption">The app uses the default system font.</figcaption>
  </figure>
</div>

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
  How to do this on the web
{% endDetailsSummary %}
  By leveraging the <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/user-select"><code>user-select</code></a>
  CSS property with the value of <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/user-select#Syntax:~:text=none,-The"><code>none</code></a>,
  you can protect UI elements from being accidentally selected.
  Be sure, though, to not abuse this property for making <em>app contents</em> unselectable,
  it should only be used for UI elements like button texts, etc.
  The <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-family#<generic-name>:~:text=system%2Dui,-Glyphs"><code>system-ui</code></a>
  value for the <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-family"><code>font-family</code></a> CSS property allows you to

>   specify the default UI font of the system to be used for your app, whatever it may be in the concrete case.

Author: ```suggestion
  specify the default UI font of the system to be used for your app.
```

>   specify the default UI font of the system to be used for your app, whatever it may be in the concrete case.

Author: I just removed the last bit, this should make it clear.
